---
title: Debugging Shaders
description: Tips and tricks for debugging AZSL shaders in O3DE's Atom renderer.
weight: 300
---

You might encounter shader compilation errors. This section goes over the tools and practices for debugging shaders in Atom. 

<!-- NOTE: The below content is copied from the Shader System > Debugging wiki. Update is needed for this section.  -->

Here are some basic debugging tips.

Shader Assets are processed by the Asset Processor. You can filter the assets by name, re-order them, and display detailed logs for failed assets.

- Make sure the AP has the correct Root and Project set, and that the port is available (multiple instances of AP can't use the same port).
- Make sure the AP detects modifications to existing shaders. If you edit a line in any shader and save the changes, it should recompile successfully.
  - Visit Computer Setup if either of the first two steps are not correct.
- Assuming shaders compile normally, to debug a failing shader, do the following:
  - Check the Event Log Details of the asset job. The shader assets pass through several tools and each of them emits detailed errors and warnings, but it might make it difficult to locate the actual fail. Make sure you are looking at the correct error. Try using the filter tool to show only Errors and inspect the first one.
  
  - The temporary files for a failed asset can be found in the asset's temp folder, something like `AssetProcessorTemp\JobTemp-pPXxjx`. Check the Event Log Details to find the actual path and open this folder. 
  
  This is usually reported somewhere above the error message in a line like "ShaderPlatformInterface: 
  ```bash
  Executing "/build/bin/profile/Builders/AZSLc/azslc.exe" "<project-path>/AssetProcessorTemp/JobTemp-pPXxjx/SkyBox.vulkan.azslin" --full --Zpr --strip-unused-srgs --use-spaces --unique-idx --namespace=vk --root-const=128 --W1 -o "<project-path>/AssetProcessorTemp/JobTemp-pPXxjx/SkyBox.vulkan.hlsl"' ..."
  ```
  - You can run the above "Executing" command starting at `<project-path>\...\azslc.exe` from the command line to reproduce the exact command that was sent to AZSLc.
    
    - The various `.json` files are different reflection data: InputAssembly (`.ia`), OutputMerger (`.om`), BindingDependency, Options. Each of them is also generated by parsing the `.azslin` file with different command line attributes, such as `--ia`, `--om`, `--options`, `--srg`, and so on. 
    
    - If you see the .azslcout file (or dx12.shaderresource - they're identical), that means AZSLc translated the source successfully, but the native shader compiler failed (dxc, spirv-cross, wave-psslc).
    
  - The reported errors are correct, but the original file name and line numbers are likely off. There is a task to fix this.